Akshay, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
Awesome to have you here.
Thanks, Michael.
Really happy to be here.
Yeah.
It's data science hour, isn't it?
Yeah, I guess it is.
In a sense, but also in a sense,
kind of bringing data science a little closer
to traditional formal computer science,
or more, I don't know.
I don't know what to think about computer science.
Software engineering.
Yeah, that's our goal.
Blending data science with sort of the rigor
reproducibility of software engineering.
Yeah.
And I think people are going to find it pretty interesting.
It's definitely gained a lot of traction lately.
So it's going to be really fun to dive into Marimo.
Before we do, though, who are you?
What are you doing here?
Tell people about yourself.
Sure.
So I'm Akshay.
I'm one of the co-founders and developers of Marimo.
I started working on Marimo a few years ago, I guess, a little over two years ago.
right after I finished a PhD at Stanford,
where I was working on machine learning research.
And before that, I was at Google Brain,
where I worked on TensorFlow.
And I guess for the past several years,
I've been wearing different hats,
either a computer systems hat,
where I build open source software
and domain-specific languages
for people who do machine learning,
or I just do machine learning.
And for the past few years,
it's been the first hat.
So working on the Marimo Notebook,
which is our attempt to blend the best parts of interactive computing with the reusability and reproducibility of regular Python software.
Well, that's very cool.
You've been right at the cutting edge of this whole machine learning thing, I guess, right?
If you go back a handful of years, it's different today than it was five years ago.
Oh, yeah.
It's very different.
I was at Google Brain 2017 to 2018.
So I think we had transformers, but we didn't really appreciate all that they could do.
Yeah.
But it was a really exciting time to be at Google Brain where, like, it was, you know, pure research, just, like, one that you could just work on anything that you wanted to work on.
And I was an engineer there on a, actually, on a small sub team inside of TensorFlow where we were working on TensorFlow 2, which is sort of making TensorFlow more like PyTorch crudely.
And that was a lot of fun, but yeah, got to go to like a bunch of talks by researchers and it was a special time for sure.
Yeah, I bet it was.
Well, you know, that's such an interesting background.
I think maybe give people a sense of what is Google Brain and all that and maybe just Transformers, right?
It's the foundation of so much surprising and unexpected tech these days.
Yeah, yeah, I'm happy to.
So Google Brain, what is Google Brain?
So I guess technically Google Brain no longer exists as it did back then.
Now it's just DeepMind with DeepMind and Google Brain merged.
But back then, Google Brain was, so there was, I guess, two research orders under the
alphabet umbrella, Google Brain and DeepMind.
And Google Brain was a place where it was really special.
There were folks working on all kinds of research projects from you, like using transformers
for code generation, but also like systems research projects.
Like I was there when the JAX machine learning library,
which is an alternative to TensorFlow and PyTorch,
was still being in the early days of development.
And I was able to meet with like Roy Frostig, Matt Johnson.
And that was really cool sort of coming up to speed
on machine learning systems in that era.
I was only there for a year because I decided I wanted to go back
and do a PhD myself in machine learning research
where I used actually TensorFlow and PyTorch
to work on new sort of like machine learning modules.
Did you feel bad when you used PyTorch?
You're like, oh, I'm cheating.
No, no.
I mean, a little, I guess.
But, you know, it's the thing like everyone else used PyTorch
and we had just started working on TensorFlow too
when I joined whereas PyTorch had already been mature.
So it was the responsible thing to do.
I think.
And Transformers.
What are these Transformer things?
They came out of Google, right?
Yeah, yeah, they did. Attention is all you need.
These Transformer things, I guess, are the backbone of all these large language models that we're seeing today.
And they've proved to have an incredible capacity for modeling, I guess, in a generative way, all kinds of text.
And in a way that, honestly, if I had to admit, like surprised me, like at the time in 27 to 18, like we were doing good work in like machine translation and stuff.
But even back then, you know, there was researchers who were working on at Google Brain, like, you know, code generation, like writing a bunch of unit tests, stuff that people do regularly today, actually, with large language models.
I was I put on my systems engineer hat back then, and I was a little skeptical, to be honest.
have just totally proved wrong and I'm happy to have been proved wrong.
So it's been phenomenal seeing sort of that,
the success of that particular model. And yeah,
having played a very small part in it.
Yeah. I was,
I've been a long time skeptic of machine learning in the sense that for so
long, it was, it's kind of like fusion. It's, it's going to be amazing,
but it's 10, 20, 30 years out and, and maybe, you know,
And it was all almost like knowledge, knowledge-based type things.
And just, I mean, it was interesting.
It looked kind of relevant and possibly useful in some of the cases, but not like it is today.
Like today, people don't even care about technology, are blown away by this stuff.
And they use it all day long.
And it's gone so much farther and so much faster than I expected it to.
I'm all about it these days.
I still write most of my code,
but anytime there's something tricky
instead of going to Google
and hunting through Stack Overflow,
let's see what chat says about it
or something like that.
And then maybe we'll go to Google
if we don't get a good answer.
Yeah, no, no, I'm the same way.
I spent more time than I care to admit last night
migrating from Vim to NeoVim.
And I know I'm late to the party,
but perplexity and other tools
just made it a lot easier.
to start from scratch installation
without bringing over my VimRC.
And you can ask it detailed questions, right?
For example, I needed some way to reset the initial offset
in DaVinci Resolve timelines.
It was, okay, well, here's your four options,
and these are the way you can do it, and these are the trade-offs.
It's not just you might get an, you know, here is the switch,
but you get an analysis.
And I'm pretty impressed.
But so the reason I'm going into this is I want to ask you, having been on the inside
at the early days, what is your perspective of seeing this trajectory or trajectory is
the way I should probably, you know, upwards, not logarithmic.
Yeah.
I guess what I will say is I think one thing that's like really changed, like, so back
when I was at Brain, even the models were advanced, like I felt like in order to use
machine learning well you really did need to be somewhat trained in machine learning you know like
it was important to understand what a loss function like basic things like what a loss function was
what's training what's validation these days like you don't need to like at all actually i think
especially to use llms right like do you just need to know inputs and outputs it's like a function
call that sort of has fuzzy outputs and you know it's a mathematical function in quotes um yeah so
I think like that's like one thing that's like totally,
I guess it kind of shows that artificial intelligence is transitioning more from,
I guess,
like a science to a technology and that tool that people can just like readily
use without really needing to understand how it works.
As for the trajectory,
I've been bad at making predictions in the past.
I think I would be bad at predicting anything right now.
surely these models are very good for coding, for massaging, marketing, copy.
And I do random tasks where I have a bio I wrote in first person,
and someone asked for it in third person, and I'm too lazy to change,
and I just give it to a chat model.
Yeah.
But if you ask for a trajectory of AGI or ASI,
which I don't even remember what the S stands for these days,
But I'm not sure I can predict anything on those timelines.
Yeah, I hear you.
I'm with you on the prediction.
But I would say that the adoption and effectiveness of it has far outpaced what I would have guessed five years ago.
Yeah.
I mean, even local models, it's kind of exciting what you can just run on your MacBook.
I also didn't really anticipate that.
Yeah.
All right.
I don't want to make this the AI show because it's not about AI.
But your background is so interesting.
So when you were working initially on Transformers, did you as a group, not you individually, you
guys perceive the need for the scale of the computation?
Like, you know, to train GPT-01, I don't know how much compute was involved, but probably
more than cities use in terms of energy sometimes, you know what I mean?
It was a lot.
And how much compute were you all using back then versus now,
I guess is what I'm getting at.
So I guess, yeah, and I think you kind of said it,
but just to clarify or to make it clear that I personally didn't work on
Transformers. I was working on TensorFlow. So the, yeah, the,
I guess embedded DSL for training machine learning models that was used within
Google and still used today.
I can't give you specific numbers to be honest,
Because I was pretty deep in the systems part of working on TensorFlow and not paying too much attention for standing up distributed clusters.
I did things like adding support to TensorFlow for creating a function library.
TensorFlow is like a Dataflow graph engine, and it didn't have functions in it.
So I added support for functions, partitioning functions over devices.
But other teams used that work to go and train the big models.
I know it was a lot of compute, but a lot versus a lot, you know, all caps versus, you know, just capital case.
Yeah, I'm sure there's a delta.
I just, I don't know how much.
Yeah.
Well, today they're all talking about restarting nuclear reactors and plugging them straight to the data center.
So it's a weird time.
Let's go back maybe a little bit before then.
2012 or so, I believe is maybe the right time frame.
I mean, let's talk about notebooks.
And around then, Jupyter Notebooks burst on the scene.
And I think they fundamentally changed the ecosystem of Python
and basically scientific work in general.
By changing Python, I mean there are so many people in Python
who are here because they got pulled into a notebook.
They wrote a little bit of code.
They got incredible results.
They were never, ever a programmer,
but now they're the maintainer of an open source project
or something like that.
You know what I mean?
They're just like, oh, this is kind of neat.
Oh, I'll create a biology library or whatever.
And then all of a sudden, they're deep in it.
And so, Jupyter, I think, was really the start of that.
Maybe there was some precursors that I'm not familiar with.
Yeah, Jupyter was essentially the start of it, especially for Python.
Like, I think the idea of computation on notebooks has been around.
But, yeah, the IPython REPL, I guess the IPython project with the IPython REPL, I think, was early 2000s.
And Jupyter, I think you're right, like 2012-ish, as he's burst onto the scene with putting the IPython REPL into a web browser with multiple REPL cells.
And all of a sudden you could do more than what you could do in the console and also made it a lot more accessible.
Yeah.
Going back to that sixth cell you entered on your REPL and editing it, that is not a way to draw beginners in.
No, definitely not.
Up arrow key six times, no.
Yeah, 2012 coincidentally is when I started college as an undergrad.
So I had been using, I kind of grew up, as long as I used Python, I think I probably was using Jupyter Notebooks.
And I even started using Google Colab before it was made public, because when I was interning at Google.
And I think the year I started working at Google full-time is when they made it public to the world.
So yeah, Notebooks have sort of shaped the way that I think and interact with code quite a bit.
Yeah, absolutely.
So maybe you could give us some perspective.
It sounds like you were there right at the right time.
What was the goal and sort of the job of Jupyter Notebooks
and those kinds of things then?
And how has that changed now?
And maybe how does it still solve that problem
or not solve it so much?
Yeah, I think, so stepping back,
So you mentioned how many people who might not have traditionally worked with code sort
of came into it because of Jupyter Notebooks.
And I think that's really...
I think you're onto something there.
I think that's correct.
And I think the special thing about Notebooks is that they mix code and visuals and narrative
text in this interactive programming environment.
And that interactivity in particular, I think, is really important for anyone who works with data.
It's where you got to like first like, you know, run some queries against your data to see the general shape of it, you know, run some transformations to see like, you know, basically like explore your data, like hold it in your hands, right?
And like, you know, repls before and then Jupyter Notebooks in particular lets you do that in a way that you just can't easily do in a script because it holds the variables in memory.
And so I think the role that it played was that it enabled data scientists or computational scientists, biologists, astrophysicists, all these different types of people who work with data.
It let them rapidly experiment with code and models and importantly get some kind of like artifact out of it.
And in particular, this was like a static HTML type artifact, right, where you have some text documenting what experiments you're running.
You have Python code, and then you have like matplotlib plots and other artifacts.
And I think for the sciences in particular early on, that was super important and transformative.
And we were talking about other computational notebook environments.
And it's interesting to mention this because things like this existed before Mathematica's workbooks, I think they called them.
I might have done that wrong.
But I think just the open source nature of Python and the accessibility of it just made it way easier to get started.
And also the fact that it was browser-based, right?
So that you can easily share the HTML artifacts that come out, I think was really transformative.
And insofar as what they're used for today, they're used for a lot.
It's kind of remarkable how much they're used.
I remember seeing a statistic for Google Colab alone,
which is just one particular hosted version of a Jupyter Notebook.
And it was two years ago, and they said something about having 10 million monthly active users.
And so the number of people who use Jupyter on a monthly basis is surely larger than that.
Oh, yeah.
And they're used for the sciences, but they're also used for, like, things where you want, like, the traditional rigor and reproducibility of software engineering.
So they're increasingly used for, like, data pipelines and, like, ETL jobs.
And, like, so anyone who's in Databricks, for example, runs, like, they call them workflows, Databricks workflows, through essentially Jupyter Notebooks.
They're used for training machine learning models.
I've trained many models in a Jupyter Notebook.
I've developed algorithms in Jupyter Notebooks.
I've produced scientific figures that go straight into my paper from a Jupyter Notebook.
And the reason people do this is because, again, the interactivity and the visuals that come out is very liberating compared to using a script.
I think there's also a developing understanding that happens from them.
because when you were writing just a straight program,
you're like, okay, this step, this step, this step, this step,
and then we get the answer.
Whereas notebooks, it's like step one, step two.
Let me look at it.
Oh, maybe that's different.
Let me go back and change.
It's more iterative from an exploratory perspective.
Yeah, I think that's exactly right.
Yeah.
Because you have that, like, that, you know,
when you're writing like a software system,
you kind of know the state of the system.
You know what you want to change it to.
But when you're working with data, there's that unknown, what will my algorithm do to my data?
You just have to run it to find out.
Yeah, absolutely.
And graphs and tables and iterative stuff like that is really nice.
So why create something instead of Jupyter?
Why is Jupyter not enough for the world?
Yeah.
I think there's a...
So you're the creator of Marimo, along with the rest of the team and so on.
But yeah, it's like, why create this thing when, when Jupyter exists?
Yeah. So I think there's quite a few reasons. So,
so Jupyter notebooks are like, I guess more like Jupyter notebooks powered by the
IPython kernel, just to, to, to put a finger on it.
Right. Cause it could be different.
It could be like a C++ kernel or.NET kernel or whatever.
Yeah, exactly. But this particular form of notebooks where you get a page and then in the front end shows you a bunch of cells that you execute one at a time imperatively, even though you have a sequence of cells, it still is essentially a REPL.
And like it's the onus falls on the developer, the scientist, whoever's using it to like run each cell on their own and like maintain the state of their kernel.
So like you run a cell, say you have three cells, you know, you decide to go rerun the second cell.
You have to remember to rerun whatever cell depends on it.
Maybe it's the third cell. Maybe it's the first cell because you wrote things out of order.
And so you can easily get into a state with Jupyter Notebooks where your code on the page doesn't match the outputs that were created.
Yeah.
So if you were to, like, basically go to the menu option, say rerun all cells, you would get different answers.
Exactly.
And this is, like, it's actually been studied.
And, like, it happens a kind of a shockingly large amount of times that, like, so there's one study in 2019 by Pimentel.
I'm going to probably pronounce his name wrong, but by, I think, four professors.
And they studied a bunch of notebooks on GitHub.
And they found that only like a quarter of the notebooks that were on GitHub, they were able to run it all.
And then like either 4% of those or 4% of all of them, only 4% of them, like when they ran,
recreated the same results that were serialized in the notebook.
Meaning like maybe people ran sales out of order when they originally created the notebook and then committed it.
Or maybe they didn't like create a requirements.txt that faithfully captured the package environment they used.
So there's like this recognition that Jupyter Notebooks suffer from a reproducibility crisis,
which is rather unfortunate for a tool that is used for science and data science and data engineering,
like things where reproducibility is paramount.
and so that was one issue reproducibility was like one main thing that sort of we wanted to
solve for with marima notebooks and the other thing i think that we alluded to earlier is that
um so jupyter notebooks are stored as like a json file uh where like the outputs like the plots
etc are serialized as these binary strings and like the you know the one downside of that is
that you can't really use these things like you can use like traditional software at least not
without jumping through extra hoops so like you make a small change to your jupyter notebook you
get a gigantic git diff because you know the binary representation of some object changed by
a large amount or um you want to reuse the python code uh in that jupyter notebook when you have to
run it through like a jupy text or some other thing to strip it out and then so you you oftentimes
you get this like situation where people just like end up copy pasting a bunch of things across a
bunch of notebooks and it quickly gets really messy and I that was another thing we wanted to
solve for making notebooks like get friendly and interoperable with other Python tooling like get
py test etc yeah there's some things that'll run them kind of function module like but yeah it's
it's not really the intended use case is it yeah it's not but people want to which is i think like
the uh it's funny because like the intended use case i think of like traditional notebooks like
jupiter was like interactive repl explorer data um produce like simple narrative text but then
like they just got used for so much more than that in situations yeah where reproducibility
reusability is like really important and and I think that that's what we're trying to solve for
yeah it sounds great it looks like you've done quite well we'll dive into the features and stuff
but just wondering out loud you know that study I know it was not your study so I'm not asking you
for answers just just what do you think if it's that low of a percentage of reproducibility because
people fell down on their like rigorous software engineering for example like no requirements file
hard-coded pass instead of relative pass or whatever if it's that number for notebooks i
wonder about just plain python files that are also meant to act to solve like science problems and
stuff that just didn't happen to be in notebooks you know i wonder if they're any better yeah it's
a good question i i think they will be better i can just give an anecdote i think why i think
they would be better and so like um so so one example this happened to me many times but like
one particular example is like when i was working on my phd thesis which was about vector embeddings
is me and a couple of co-authors and um you know both of us did our like created the examples for
there are this embedding algorithm in like Jupyter notebooks and these notebooks produced a bunch of
plots etc and so at the end of the uh once the thesis was written i was putting up all our code
on GitHub and so i asked one of my co-authors like hey like can you share your notebooks with me
and this co-author is amazing he's really smart but not necessarily trained as a software engineer
and he shares his Jupyter notebook with me and i run it and it doesn't work at all and the reason
it doesn't work at all is that there's there's like multiple cells and there's like this branching
path where like it's clear that like he ran like you know you see the execution order serialized in
the notebook and it's not like one two three four it's like one two seven four three it's like
these cells were ran in this path dependent way and then also it's like there's like three three
cells in the middle he ran just one of them i'm not exactly sure which one and like whereas if you
had a python script there's only one way to i mean sure you can have that's a good point you do not
really get a choice. It runs top to bottom, depending on the data. Okay. So, yeah, that
is something that's really, it's just very counter to the concept of reproducibility is
that you can run them in any order and there's not, you know, I feel like, I feel like Jupyter
notebooks should almost have like a red bar to the cross, like an out of order bar warning
across the top if it's not top to bottom. It doesn't have to be 1, 2, 3. It could be 1,
5, 6, 9. But it should be a monotonic increasing function as you read the numbers top to bottom.
Otherwise, it should be like a big warning or like a weird, like some kind of indicator like,
hey, you're in the danger zone. You know what I mean?
Yeah. And there's actually another thing that actually has happened to me way more often than
I should care to admit while working with Jupyter Notebooks is that it's not just the order you run
the cells. It's also what happens if you delete a cell. Because when you delete a cell, you no
longer... So say a cell declares a variable X and you deleted that cell, you're like, I don't want X
anymore. But you may forget that just by deleting the cell, you're not removing the variables from
memory. And so X still exists. And so then you're running other cells that depend on X. Everything
But then you come back and you run your notebook and everything's broken.
And you don't, you have no idea.
The first time this happened to me, it took me forever to debug.
And later on, you realize-
I can imagine that is so rough.
Yeah.
Later on, you realize, okay, this is a pattern that happens, but it's like, yeah.
So that's another thing that we also wanted to solve for in Marimo notebooks.
Awesome.
All right.
Well, tell us about Marimo.
Okay.
So let's see.
So Marimo is an open source notebook for Python.
The main thing that's different between Marimo and Jupyter is that Marimo is reactive.
And what that means is that unlike a Jupyter notebook where you can run cells in any arbitrary order you like,
In Marimo, when you run one cell, it knows what other cells need to be run in order to make sure that your code and outputs are synchronized.
So it's kind of like Excel, right?
So you have two cells.
One declares X.
Another one references X.
You run the cell that declares X or defines X.
All other cells that reference X will automatically run or they'll be marked as stale.
You can configure it if you're scared of automatic execution.
But the point is that it manages your variables for you
so that you don't have to worry about outputs
becoming decohered from your code.
And similarly, if you delete a cell,
the variable will be scrubbed from memory
and then cells that depended on it
will either be marked as stale with a big warning
or automatically run and invalidated.
So that reactivity provides some amount of reproducibility.
And then it also-- some other key features,
and then we can dive into each of them,
is an additional reactivity.
Marima notebooks are stored as pure Python files,
which makes them easy to version with Git.
And then we've also made it easy to run Marima notebooks
as Python scripts and then share them as interactive web apps
with little UI elements.
Yeah, I'm excited to talk about that.
That's some cool stuff there.
OK, so when you create a variable, if you say x equals 1,
it's not just a pi long pointer in memory, right?
It's something that kind of looks at the read and write,
to get in the set of it and creates like a relationship
or says, if you were to push the change into it,
it says, okay, I have been changed.
Who else is interested in reading from me?
And it can sort of work that out, right?
How's that work?
- Actually, it's not really implemented in that way.
So, okay.
So let's see.
Yeah, this is interesting to dive into because there's like two ways that you can like get at reactivity.
Like so in Marima, what we actually do is we do static analysis.
So we look for definitions and references on like of global variables.
And then so we just make a graph out of that.
So for every cell, we look at the, I guess, the loads in the ASTs and then like the assignments.
And so we can see statically who declares what and who reads what, but who is a cell.
And so that makes it like performant and also predictable of like how your notebook is going
to run.
An alternative, I think what you were getting at was like runtime tracing.
It's more like a JavaScript front end sort of deal, like a view binding, model binding
type thing or something like that.
So yeah, everything we do is done with static analysis.
There is another project called IPyFlow, which was like a reactive kernel for Jupyter.
It's still around.
They took like the runtime tracing approach of like checking on every assignment.
Like, okay, there's a read.
And now where is that object in memory and then running cells that depend on it?
I think in practice, you know, I was talking to Stephen Mackey, the author of that extension.
And then also, like, based on some work that I saw at Google TensorFlow, like, that's, like, really hard to get 100% right.
It's basically impossible to get 100% right.
So, like, you will miss some, like, low references and definitions.
And so, like, there's this weird usability cliff as a user where, like, when you run a cell, you're not sure what else will run.
Whereas if you do it based on static analysis, you can give guarantees on what will run and what won't.
Yeah, I guess the static analysis is a good choice because there's only so many cells.
You don't have to track it down to like, well, within the DOM and all the JavaScript objects,
we're linking all these together and they can do whatever they want from all these different angles.
It's just like, when this cell runs, what other cells do we need to think about?
So it's kind of like, what does this create?
What does it change?
and then push that along, right?
So it's a little more constrained.
- Exactly, yeah.
So basically, yeah, that's exactly right.
And so it's a data flow graph
where the data flowing on the edges
is the variables across cells.
Yeah, I don't know.
I think I've been thinking about data flow graphs
for a long time ever since TensorFlow
during my PhD when I worked on CVXPY.
So it's just a thing that I enjoy thinking about
and working on.
- Yeah, well, what about your experience
on working on TensorFlow and at Google
at Stanford and stuff that sort of influenced this project?
Yeah, a couple of things.
So definitely a big thing that influenced this project
was working as a scientist at Stanford,
where I and my colleagues use Jupyter Notebooks
on almost a daily basis,
because they let us see our data while we worked on it.
And so really valued the iterative programming environment
really didn't like all the bugs that we kept on running into. I went to her like kind of our
fault, right? Because of like, oh, we'd forget to run a cell, et cetera. Didn't like that it was not
easy to reuse the code in a notebook in just other Python modules. Didn't like that I couldn't
share my artifacts in a meaningful way with my PhD advisor who can't run Python notebooks. Like
I couldn't like make a little app to showcase my research project.
It's so interesting how PhD advisors and just professors in general, how they're either embracing
or their inability to embrace or their prejudices for or against the technology so influence
science, the people in the research teams, everything.
It's like, well, we'd like to use this, but the principal author really doesn't like it,
doesn't want to run it, so we're not using that.
Or, you know, just these little edge cases.
Like, I was made to learn Fortran in college.
I'm still sour about it.
that's funny yeah no it's true yeah it does have a big effect and then at google i guess the things
that influenced so we used notebooks too there um i since i was doing the systems engineering work
at google i personally didn't use them too much although i did use like google collab for like
training like creating training courses and stuff for for like other engineers uh and for demos but
i guess the part of google that influenced it was just like thinking about data flow graphs for a
year and um you know uh i i we were there was like a couple of parable projects like one that was
using runtime tracing for like figuring out like how to make a dag and it was just i don't know
kind of traumatic just because you like you miss things and the user experience just like
it kind of falls over and so i guess the part from there was it just made me not want to use
runtime tracing made me embrace static analysis for this.
Yeah.
Yeah, it makes a lot of sense.
All right.
Well, let's talk some features here.
What are the, I guess probably the premier feature is the reactivity, in which case it
doesn't matter which cell you run, they're never going to get out of date, right?
Yeah, that's correct.
So the reactivity, in other words, the data flow graph behind it is the premier feature.
And it lets you reason about your code locally, right, which is really nice.
Like you can just look at your one cell.
You don't really have to worry about, you know, you know what variables it reads and what it defines.
And you don't have to worry about, oh, but what cells do I need to run before this?
So not only does it like make sure your code and outputs are in sync,
it also like um makes it really like fun and useful like to it makes it possible to like
really rapidly experiment with like ideas as long as like your cells aren't too expensive
if you enable automatic execution then you can change a parameter run the set and run a particular
cell and i'll run only you know what's required to like um update like subsequent outputs um
And then another consequence of reactivity that I think is really neat and our users really like is it makes it far easier to use interactive UI widgets than it is in a Jupyter notebook.
And the way that this works is that Marimo is both a notebook and also a library.
So you can import Marimo as Mo into your notebook.
And when you do this, you get access to a bunch of things,
including a bunch of different UI widgets,
ranging from the simple ones like sliders, drop-down menus,
to cooler ones like interactive selectable charts
and data frame transformers that automatically generate
the Python code needed for your transformation.
And the way that reactivity comes into here is that
like because we know which when you create a UI element as long as you bind it to a global variable
just say you know my slider equals moda UI.slider then when you interact with the slider and on
anywhere on the screen well we can just say okay that slider is bound to x we just need to run all
other cells that depend on x and all of a sudden you have really nice interactivity interactive
elements controlling your code execution without ever having to write a callback.
And so I think people find that really liberating too.
So you don't really have to hit backspace, change a character value for your
variable shift, enter, shift, enter, shift, enter, you know, just, just, just change
a number and everything automatically recalculates.
Yeah.
And this dependency flow, is it possible to have a cyclical graph?
Like if I did this in Jupyter, I could go down to the third cell and define X and then go back up and then use X.
If I run it in the right order, it won't know that there's a problem.
Imagine it's only possible to go one way, right?
You can't get into a weird cycle.
Yeah.
So we do give people escape patches.
We ask them, please don't use it unless you really know what you're doing and you really want to do this.
Because in most cases, we find, especially for like, if your goal is to just like work with data as a data scientist, data engineer scientist, we feel you don't need that cycles.
You don't need cycles.
But if you're making an app, and I guess I should mention Marimo lets you run any notebook as, well, a notebook, but also from the command line, you can serve your notebook as a web app, like similar to Streamlit if you've seen that.
In those cases, sometimes you do want state, basically, right, like cyclic references.
So by default, Marimo actually checks for cycles.
If you have a cycle across cells, it politely tells you, like, hey, that's not really cool in Marimo.
Please break your cycle.
Here's some suggestions how to do that.
But if you're really insistent, then you can go to our docs and learn about the state object that we have
that does let you get into some runtime-based cell execution.
And you can update a state object and kind of in a React from 10D way, it'll run dependence
of that state.
Okay.
Interesting.
Yeah, I guess that makes sense for apps.
You definitely need some sort of global state there.
Yeah.
I think we've seen that sometimes our users will reach for state in call bits just because
that's what they're used to.
And that's what they maybe were required to use in like Jupyter, et cetera.
So we're trying to tell them like, hey, in most cases,
you actually don't need this.
Yeah, very cool.
So when you create a Jupyter notebook,
you don't really create Python files.
You create the notebook files.
And those notebook files are JSON with both embedded cell
execution bits, the code, but also the answers that go below.
That's why if you go to GitHub and you look at a notebook,
you can instantly see what could be super expensive computation,
but pictures and stuff there because it's like residual in the artifact.
Right.
Yeah.
You guys do Python files.
Do you have a way to like save that state in a sort of presentation style
or something like that?
You know what I mean?
Is there like an associated state file?
Yeah.
So that's a really good question.
And the answer is yes, but that is the biggest tradeoff, I think, of our file format.
So a surprising number of people actually have come to us and told us, I didn't expect this,
but they tell us the reason we decided to try Marima Notebooks is because you say it is versionable with Git.
That's the one reason, especially people in software and industry, and then they stay for all the other things.
So that's what the pure Python file format allows, in addition to modularity, running it as a script.
for seeing outputs yeah they're not saved in the python file so we have a couple of ways
to get around that so one like you can export any marimo notebook to an ipython notebook file
actually so like you can set up this like we have a feature like automatic snapshotting
you can automatically snapshot your notebook to like a parallel ipymb file that's stored in a
sub directory of your notebook folder.
And so you can push that up or share that if you like.
When working locally, though, we actually have this cool feature that my co-finder,
Miles, recently built is that we actually, so when you're working, you're working with
your notebook, the outputs are actually saved.
The representation of the outputs are saved in this, like, this sub directory,
underscore, underscore, marimo.
So that when the next time you open the notebook,
it just picks up those outputs and then like loads them into the,
into the browser so that you can see where you left off.
So I see. So kind of like Pycache.
Yeah. I would actually assume given the name,
but I haven't actually looked into Pycache too much.
Well, I mean,
just in the sense that it's saved like right there in your project using that
directory. Oh yes. Yes. Yeah. The Pycache folder. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
And we have one other feature that another contributor, his name is Dylan, has been developing, which I think is really cool, which is along those same lines, but based on Nick's style caching.
So it'll actually save the Python objects themselves using a variety of different protocols.
Because we have the DAG,
he can actually guarantee consistency of the cache.
But that means not only are your outputs automatically loaded,
also the variables are loaded,
so you can literally pick up where you left off.
Yeah. It sounds like some sweet SQLite could
be in action there instead of just flat files or whatever.
Yeah.
Yeah, very cool.
So you talked about when the reactivity fires,
it can sometimes be expensive to recompute the cells.
Sometimes they're super simple.
Sometimes they're-- train the machine learning model
for two days.
Yeah.
Are there caching mechanisms?
In a Python script, we've got functools.lrucache.
And then there's other things that are kind of cool,
in-process caches like PyMocha is kind of like the func tool stuff but way more flexible and
so on. And you could put those onto functions that then would have really interesting caching
characteristics. Like if you're going to rerun it but I've run it before with this other value,
here's the same answer back, right? Is there a way to set up that kind of caching or performance
memoization type stuff?
Yeah, definitely.
And that same contributor, Dylan.
So he's implemented these and is continuing to build it out.
But we have, I guess, two options.
One is in-memory cache, which is basically the API is the same as functools.cache,
but is designed to work in an iterative programming environment.
Like if you use functools.cache naively, like if a function,
if a cell defining a function reruns,
like your cache gets busted, right?
So Modoc cache is a little smarter
and like using the DAG can know when,
whether or not it needs to bust the cache,
but to the user, it feels the same.
And then we also have a persistent cache,
which is the one that I was kind of alluding to
when I mentioned you can automatically pick up
where you left off by loading objects from disk.
And so you can like put an entire cell
in a context manager, like with Mo.persistent cache, it'll sort of do the right thing.
We've been talking about experimenting with like opting into letting users opt into like
global cell wide caching, just like, you know, automatically memorize cells or just have
a UI element to do something like that.
But we haven't quite done that yet.
Yeah.
I mean, it sounds real tricky for Jupyter, but because you all know the inputs and the
outputs, it's almost as if you could sort of drive a hidden LRU cache equivalent at the
cell level. You know what I mean?
That's exactly right. Yeah. I think, yeah, because we know the inputs and outputs, that's
kind of how everything flows from a project. You can think about projects like, if you
turn a notebook into a data flow graph, what can you do? And yeah, caching is, smart caching
is definitely one of them.
Yeah. I mean, it's not a, I make a sound like, well, you know, the inputs, outputs,
So it's fine.
But you could have the same data frame,
but you could have added a column to the data frame.
And the LRU cache goes, is it the same pointer?
It is.
We're good to go.
It's like, well, yes.
However, it's not the same.
You almost got to hash it or do something funky.
Yeah, it's not perfect.
Automatic sounds hard.
No.
Yeah, exactly.
That's why we haven't quite enabled it.
Yeah, it is hard.
Side effects too, network requests, all these things.
All right. I have three more topics I want to cover before we run out of time here. We may cover more, but three sort of required. First one, because this is the one I'm going to forget most likely. You were at Google, and then by way of going through a PhD, you now are not at Google creating this project, which is open source on GitHub. And I don't see a pricing page at the top, but I do see it for enterprises.
Like, how is this sustaining itself?
Like, what's the business model?
So when we first started right after my PhD, so that was early 2022, we were actually lucky
enough to get funding from a national lab associated with Stanford.
So the Stanford Linear Accelerator.
So I was talking with some scientists there and we were talking about, I knew I wanted
to make this thing.
And they were like, what are you up to?
And I was like, oh, well, I want to make this notebook thing that fixes all notebooks, inspired by PudoJL.
And they were like, that's awesome.
We're scientists.
We use notebooks every day.
And we're getting a little tired of the reproducibility issues.
We want to make apps.
So they're like, we'll fund you to do this.
Awesome.
So they kind of wrote you into one of their larger grants, something like that?
We got a subcontract that was covered by one of their grants.
So that wasn't enough for me and my co-founder, Miles,
to work on it for two years full-time alone.
And I think it really let us polish the product and develop it.
And then mid-last year in July,
one of our users,
one of our probably biggest power users actually,
is Anthony Goldblum,
who is the founder and former CEO of Kaggle.
Oh, nice.
Really into data science.
And so he's been one of our biggest power users.
And at a certain point, he last year became, I guess,
passionate enough about our project that he reached out to us and asked us,
hey, like, can this venture fund I'm part of, can we invest?
And so that was July of last year.
And so we raised money from them as well as from a bunch of prominent angel investors
like Jeff Dean from Google, Clem from Hugging Face,
Lucas B. Walter from Weights & Bias and others.
But so now our team is funded primarily through the venture funding.
Right now, our business model is build open source software based on our venture funding.
We do have plans for commercialization, but we're just not at a point where it makes sense to work on that right now.
But what I can't promise is that Marima will always be open source Apache 2.0 license.
never plan to sell the notebook itself but instead plan to work on complementary infrastructure that
yeah i can already think of yeah i can already think of two good ones so cool yeah awesome okay
the reason i ask is you know people always just want to know
either how what is kind of the success story of open source but sustainable you know as a full
time thing or if they're buying into it how how likely is that gonna stay open source or like
what's the catch you know that kind of stuff yeah yeah no it's a good question i mean we honestly i
was i think when we raised money it actually like assuaged some of our users like because they were
like oh like miles and auction are really cool they're building this really cool stuff but like
How are they paying rent?
And so when we told them, yeah, we raised a few million dollars from X Ventures,
they were like, okay, that's great.
You deserve it.
Please continue building.
Nice.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's awesome.
All right.
Let's see.
Which one are we going to talk about next?
Not this one yet.
We'll talk about this because there's a nice comment from Amir out in the audience.
I love the new AI feature in Mario.
So you have an AI capability.
And then the other thing I want to talk about is--
just so we save some time for it-- is publishing or running
your Reactive Notebook as an app.
But let's talk AI first, because we started the show that way.
I don't want to start to round it out that way, you know?
So we have a few different ways that AI is integrated
into the project.
So one thing that we're trying really hard to do
is build a modern editor designed specifically for working with data.
And I think these days, modern means one of the requirements is you have AI stuff built in.
So you can generate code with AI.
You can even tag data frames and tables that you have in memory and give them as context,
give their schemas as context to your assistant in a cursor-like way.
We're also experimenting with a new service right now,
like marimo.amp.ai, where you can go type a little prompt,
like generate me a notebook that plots a 3D quadratic surface
with Matplotlib, because I always forget how to do that.
And then it'll do its best to, in one shot,
create that notebook for you.
And then you can play around with it.
And then you can either download it locally or share it out.
yeah very cool I'll put a link to the online AI feature that people can play with it looks
really really nice and it worked super quick when I asked to go now one thing I want to talk about
really quick now that I'm looking at this is you've got the code but it's below the presentation of
the result of the code.
Yeah.
So that is a stylistic choice, which is configurable.
Because people told us, many of them told us, we don't like this.
Please just put the output below.
But other people like it.
OK, you love it.
OK, yeah.
And so this is--
OK, well, what is the point?
Is the point for me to see the code or the answer?
The point is to see the graph and the tables.
And then if I care, I'll look at the code.
So the way that I, so I think I mentioned Pluto JL really briefly.
So Pluto JL is one of our biggest inspirations.
It's a Julia project, a reactive notebook.
Now, a lot of the great ideas that I think are great about Maremo came,
honestly, very straight from Pluto.
And one thing that Fonz, like the creator of Pluto, you know,
he likes to say is he said, the code of a cell is a caption for its output.
And that's the way you think about it.
And when you think about it that way, it makes a lot of sense.
But I think like Pluto and then Observable also both have outputs on top.
I don't know.
It's like, I feel like if you, it's like one of those heuristics you use.
You look at a notebook output on top, it's a reactive notebook.
Otherwise it's imperative.
I gotcha.
Gotcha.
Yeah.
I can see why you might not like it, but I like it.
So I think it's pretty cool.
Yeah.
And then this marmo.app.ai, once you create one of these, you have a shareable link that
you can hand it off to other people, right?
Yeah.
So you can open in a new tab, which I think will, so actually this,
all of this actually, interestingly enough,
is running in our WebAssembly playground. yeah.
So there's that URL right there, which you can just share. Um,
you can also do like the little, there's a hamburger menu,
which you can click on to get a permalink that's shorter. Um,
but yeah. honestly,
We just built this generate with AI feature a little over a week ago,
and just curious to see what people use it for.
There's a lot more we could invest here.
Everyone talks about agents.
You can think about, oh, data science agent.
But for now, we're just trying to one-shot thing and see how it lands with folks.
Yeah, sure. Let's start with that.
Well, it looks really great.
The UI is super nice, so well done.
Appreciate it. I'll pass that on to Miles.
He built this as a weeknight project.
Sometimes you just get inspired, just like, you know what?
I'm doing it.
I'm just taking two days off the regular work,
and I'm just doing this.
You know what I mean?
Yeah, definitely.
Yeah.
All right.
So the final thing I want to talk about,
which you kind of hinted at a little bit there with the WebAssembly stuff,
is I want to run my app.
So tell us about, as I'm fumbling around to find a place to share,
anyway, tell us about running the app.
Yeah, so there's a few different ways.
Like the sort of traditional way,
if you have like a client server architecture,
so you have your notebook file, I don't know, notebook.py.
It has some UI elements, et cetera.
It has some code.
You get an app by default.
You hide all the code.
Now you have text outputs UI elements.
You can think of that as an app.
So if you type marimorunnotebook.py at the command line,
it'll start a web server that's serving your notebook
in a read-only session that you can connect to, et cetera.
Can you do the widgets?
Do the...
Like if it's read-only, can I slide the widgets to do stuff?
or you know what I mean?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So you can slide the widget,
see it do stuff.
You just can't change
the underlying Python code.
Like you can't like,
Got it.
But yes, that's true.
Shell exec, RM-RF.
Okay, let's go.
Yeah, yeah.
So that is not allowed.
And so that's the traditional way,
client server.
But last year,
we actually,
I think it was last year,
we added support for WebAssembly
through the Pyodide project,
which is a port of CPython
to Wasm slash Unscriptum.
And so now you can actually take any Marima notebook, and as long as you satisfy some constraints, which are documented on our website, you can export it as like static HTML and some assets and just throw it up on GitHub pages or server wherever you like.
And that's also what our online playground is powered by.
And we found this to be just like a really easy way to share notebooks, easy for folks in industry, easy for educators, and also just incredibly satisfying.
In our docs, we have tons of little Marima notebooks iframed into various API pages, etc.,
that just let you actually interact with the code as opposed to just reading it statically.
Yeah, that's nice.
That's super cool.
So it's pretty low effort, it sounds like.
And it's a lot of work to run a server and maintain it,
especially if you're going to put it up there so other people can interact with it.
Then you've got to worry about abuse and all that kind of stuff.
If you can ship it as a static website,
people are just abusing themselves if they mess with it anyway.
Exactly.
I had to give huge props to the Piedive maintainers.
They are amazing, really responsive,
and just building this labor of love.
I don't know.
They are really pushing.
Yeah, pushing the needle on sort of the accessibility of Python.
Yeah, that's awesome.
Have you done anything with PyScript?
I haven't done anything with it.
I know of them.
So they also use Pyodide underneath the hood.
Yeah, they let you pick between Pyodide for more data science-y stuff
and MicroPython for more faster stuff.
I am pretty not educated about MicroPython.
I read about it.
but I'd be curious on your take also,
like on choosing one person.
- Yeah, well, I think it's brilliant
if you want like a front-end framework equivalent.
If you want PyView or PyReact or whatever,
you don't need all the extras.
You kind of need the Python language
and a little bit of extras and the ability call APIs, right?
And so MicroPython is a super cut-down version
that's built to run on little tiny chips and self-contained
systems on a chip type things.
So it's just way lighter.
It's 100K versus 10 megs or something like that.
And if it solves the problem, if it gives you enough Python,
I guess is the way to think of it,
then it's a really cool option for front end things.
I don't know that it works for you guys,
because you want as much compatibility with Matplotlib
Seaborn and all these things. But if your goal is like, I want to replace the JavaScript language
with the Python language, and I know I'm in a browser, so I'm willing to make concessions,
I think it's a pretty good option. Yeah, that makes sense. Yeah, you're right. We want max
compatibility. We have one demo where you can load sklearn, take PCA of these images of numerical
digits, put it in all terraplot, select them, get it back as a data frame. That's all running in
the browser and like it's yeah it's actually it's on your home screen people can watch the little
yeah beddings explorer it's super cool it is very cool and it's honestly magical what
the pi that has been able to enable um yeah i imagine it's just getting started you know i think
so yeah yeah they're constantly shipping they just added support for wasm gc um so performance
is increasing, expose the bug in WebKit along the way.
Wow, okay.
That's good.
Yeah.
Cool.
All right.
Well, we're getting to the end of our time here.
So people are interested in this.
They might want to try it for themselves.
Maybe they're part of a science team or a data science team at a company.
What do you tell them if they're interested in Marmo and they want to check it out?
The easiest way, I think, is to just start running it locally.
And so our sort of source of truth is our GitHub repo.
So GitHub.com, marimoteam.com, or if it's easy to remember,
our homepage is marimo.io, which links to our GitHub.
But then you can install from pip or uv
or whatever your favorite package manager is
and just sort of go to town.
If you really just don't have the ability to do that
for whatever reason, you can go to marimo.new,
which will create a blank Marimo notebook powered by WebAssembly in your browser.
It has links to various Marimo tutorials, an example.
Notebooks.
Oh, we didn't even get to talk about the uv integration,
which may be another time,
but that's another way that Marimo makes notebooks reproducible down to the packages.
Oh, yeah, okay.
uv is fantastic.
I'm a huge fan of uv and Charlie Marsh and team.
Yeah.
But GitHub marimo.io and docs.marimo.io
is what I would look at.
Awesome.
Well, thank you so much for being on the show.
Congratulations on the project.
It's really come a long way, it sounds like.
So it looks great.
Thanks, Michael.
I appreciate it.
It was a lot of fun to chat.
Yeah, you bet.
Bye.